# Thumbnails

Mindec generates a cached thumbnail per album, extracted from the embedded
cover art. The smaller thumbnails speed up the web-based library browser
substantially.

Initially, Mindec used Imagemagick both for downsizing cover art, and for
encoding the thumnails as jpeg. However, better compressors exist, and for some
types of album art, in particular graphics with solid red areas, the thumbnails
generated by Imagemagick showed pretty bad artefacts. This document compares
compressors.

## Encoders considered

The following encoders were compared:

 * Imagemagick 7.0.9-10 Q16
 * Mozjpeg 3.3.1
 * Guetzli 1.0.1

These were used to encode 1216 downsized cover art images. They were downsized
from their native size to 140 × 140 pixels with Imagemagick through

    convert infile
        -colorspace LAB
        -filter Cosine
        -distort Resize 140x140!
        -colorspace sRGB
        -strip
        outfile.png

## Size

The cumulative size of all 1216 compressed thumbnails for various encoders:

| Size (bytes)   | Encoder     | Quality |
|---------------:|-------------|---------|
|     10,771,743 | Guetzli     | 95      |
|     11,926,551 | Guetzli     | 96      |
|     12,016,780 | Mozjpeg     | 92      |
|     12,889,658 | Imagemagick | 95      |
|     13,049,795 | Mozjpeg     | 93      |
|     13,605,461 | Guetzli     | 97      |
|     14,254,799 | Imagemagick | 96      |
|     14,988,104 | Mozjpeg     | 95      |
|     19,531,105 | Mozjpeg     | 97      |
|     20,254,930 | Guetzli     | 99      |

The quality is the quality level passed to the encoder.

The goal of this investigation was to find the most appropriate replacement for
Imagemagick at quality 95 (which was used initially), but it is not obvious how
to make a fair comparison when the sizes differ so greatly.

Because the default of Imagemagick at quality 95 was a bit arbitrary, we can
instead compare the 3 options that are closest together in terms of size, for a
fairer comparison.

* Guetzli 96, Mozjpeg 92, Imagemagick 95, with a gap of   963,107 bytes.
* Imagemagick 95, Mozjpeg 93, Guetzli 97, with a gap of   715,803 bytes.
* Guetzli 97, Imagemagick 96, Mozjpeg 95, with a gap of 1,382,643 bytes.
